# Class-based Components

1. All class-based React components must `extend` the `React.Component` class.
2. All class-based React components must override the `render` method of the `React.Component` superclass that they `extend`.

- if we add a constructor to our class, we must pass props to the super class

Every component that we create as a class inherits this.props, this.state and this.setState.

## FRIDAY - moving on to Ruby

Reading from learn x in y min:

- ruby is another OOP language, "mostly" everything is an object.
- not sure what the "bitwise" operators are doing
- `nil` is null
- `==` equivalent to js `===`?
- flase and nil are only falsy values (0 and "" are truthy?)
- similar logical operators `&&` and `||` - can also use `and` and `or` straightup
- use `#{}` between double quotes for interpolations
- combine strings with `+` but no type coercion seems like
- `puts` for console loggging
- `snake_case` variable name conventions
- arrays seem a little easier to manipulate
- `postfix-if` notation seems interesting

loop syntax:

```rb
(1..5).each do |counter| # the .. between 1 and 5 indicates "range"
  puts "iteration #{counter}"
end

# another useful syntax is .map(&:method)
a = ["FOO", "BAR", "BAZ"]
a.map { |s| s.downcase } #=> ["foo", "bar", "baz"]
a.map(&:downcase) #=> ["foo", "bar", "baz"]

```

like promises? but not async:
```rb
# Exception handling
begin
  # Code here that might raise an exception
  raise NoMemoryError, 'You ran out of memory.'
rescue NoMemoryError => exception_variable
  puts 'NoMemoryError was raised', exception_variable
rescue RuntimeError => other_exception_variable
  puts 'RuntimeError was raised now'
else
  puts 'This runs if no exceptions were thrown at all'
ensure
  puts 'This code always runs no matter what'
end
```

`gets.chomp` takes user input more directly than anything in js? string only

`gets.chomp.to_i` says, "Get a string from the user, chomp off the \n, and convert it to an integer."

to_i, to_f. simple destructing


super synchronous: REALLY runs line by line. makes it easier possibly to see where something breaks

- function definitions: ruby will implicitly `return` the last line of a function. but you can still write return


- not 100% sure about the `includes?` also setting up the if / or ? a little sketchy

- also what is `=~`? 

"On many operating systems a program can abort with `exit(0)`, and the number passed in will indicate an error or not. If you do `exit(1)` then it will be an error, but `exit(0)` will be a good exit. The reason it's backward from normal Boolean logic (with `0==false`) is that you can use different numbers to indicate different error results. You can do `exit(100)` for a different error result than `exit(2)` or `exit(1)`."

- strugging not to wrap my head around yield/blocks. i get the invisible argument thing i guess
- blocks can be either {} or do..end?
- these are callback structures?

- need to use `@` to define "instance variables" that become available across multiple files

- pp for "pretty printing"