# Week 7 LET'S GO

## React State
`State` refers to "condition regarding stored inputs" - like similar usage to regular science (state of matter)
- allows us to dynamically change elements based on a variable, ususally user input is involved
- react feature called `hooks`, first one here is `useState`

### useState
- want to import specifically as well as react when we import it. makes writing easier probably. *Yep that's it*
- optional argument to give default state
- returns an array
- first element of array is current value
- second element is "a function that can update the state and cause a render"
- first can be seen as "getter", second is "setter"
- use array destructuring to create variables out of a useState call
- the setter function also works asynchronously by default
- cannot modify the current state any other way than using the setter function!

example:
``` jsx
function App(props) {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0);

  return (
    <main>
      <Button onClick={() => setCount(count + 1)}>Increment</Button>
      <h1>Button was clicked {count} times.</h1>
    </main>
  );
}
```
- so it seems like with State we can be talking about the state of the page as a whole, but perhaps usually it's more specific to the state of an element
- it's important to note the syntax of how `setCount` is called in a callback

The difference between this and what we've seen before is: when a function is called with no arguments, pass it in the way previosuly seen. If it requires arguments, need to wrap it in another function, otherwise it will be called immediately when the page renders (and not on the button click for example, as you might want)



## Fancy Buttons
- "It is very important that hooks are not inside conditionals, loops, or other functions, they need to be at the top of the component function"
- "The names used in the destructured array have a rule: We can pick the name we want for the reference, but the setter function needs to start with the word `set`"
- if you don't set a default value on useState, then it starts as `undefined`

~~
- noting that when you do the import react, the main thing with it is convenience, VSCode will do more of the autofills etc
- more VSCode trick discovery: hitting tab with multiple lines selected will just indent all the lines... oh man that's good
- you CAN use regular loops inside a jsx function to do other things, just not within the actual component? and not as part of the return statement
- JSX does not like backticks. need to have curly braces around in order to use them.
- there's an example here where pares () are used on the value to check for a ternary. I tested it and they aren't necessary, but what I'm getting from this is, if it improves code readability, and it's not going to break the app, it's ok to use

~~

## modifying state

- since we're using a click event, we need to use `onClick`.
- "One pattern to keep the JSX clean when doing actions on events is to create a function that only needs to be referenced."

- quiz note: we "need state in React" because normal variables do need to be declared again after each render. State helps us keep track of information *between renders*.

So:
``` jsx
  const handleClick = (event) => setState(event.target.value ? event.target.value : "");

  <button onClick={handleClick} />

  // instead of

  <button onClick={event => setState(event.target.value ? event.target.value : "")} />
```

## passing state info to the rest of our app
- referred to as "lifting state up"?
- instead of settung up the useState call in the child component, we do it in the App component and pass the onfo to the child as props. "closest common ancestor" principle

- if you're doing this while refactoring, keep in mind where you have useState imported. also note how the destructuring of props happens in a similar way, but with curly braces! BECAUSE props is always an object!

- in order to set classes conditionally, the ENTIRE value of className has to be put inside curlies - then you can nest curlies to use your conditionals

## Controlled components
- talking about form, input, textarea, select elements
- these types of elements keep track of their own state naturally in HTML, but since state is such a key part of react, it makes more sense to use react to watch states for these  by checking the state of the app as a whole
- "When we create components that override HTML form elements to let React control their state, we call them controlled components."
  - this makes sense too, i mean even with jQuery we preferred to use "preventDefault" so we could take direct control of what happens

here we're going to start using `onChange` and store that in a value. we will need to use `event.target.value`

Example from compass:
``` jsx
function DisplayWord(props) {
  const [word, setWord] = useState("");

  return (
    <main>
      <input
        value={word}
        onChange={(event) => setWord(event.target.value)}
        placeholder="Please enter a word"
      />
      <h1>Your word is: {word}.</h1>
    </main>
  );
}
```

1. A user types a single character "A" into the `input` element.
2. The `onChange` event handler is triggered.
3. It invokes the `setWord` function to change the state.
4. When the state changes, React calls the component function.
5. The `useState` call returns the current value which is "A".
6. The `input` element has its value set to "A".
7. The browser displays the `"Your word is: {word}."` message as `"Your word is: A."`
  - The value of the `word` state always contains the most recent user input.
  - you can call `setWord("")` (with an empty string) at any point to empty or reset the  `<input>`.

taking a brief look at the official docs, i have to wonder about how much work the "create react app" is doing for us. Seems like react is used a bit differently in these docs, more class / extends happening

## FRAGMENTS
- instead of wrapping everything in a div in order to have one root element in a component, can use `<React.Fragment>` (or import and use it the same way we did with useState) to keep it contained but not create more DOM nodes
  - if imported you can shorthand it as simply `<> ... </>`, well... that's pretty good, as long as the fragment doesn't need props. Can't pass props to shorthand fragment
  - fragments allow us to take full advantage of the ternary / short circuit operators to render multiple sibling elements - but need to be using fragments WITHIN fragments
    - the overall expression has to follow the syntax, but because a result of a conditional is the actual thing getting rendered, the possible results also have to individually follow syntax

~~ 
- something regarding props.children: i think you need to put this in the component declaration if you don't want to hard code what goes inside the element? Yeah, if it's not in there, then you can't type anything in between the tags when you set up your App call

note: if you want to reset an input field, be sure to set its `value` attribute to the thing you are resetting. 

definitely go back and do stretch work from weekend. Feels like i am getting this but i'm scared it's more complicated than it seems...

## Styling components
- could set up seaprate css stylesheets for each component
- can define styles as variables in the component file, outside of the component definition
- css modules? bascially scoped out of a css  (this feels like probably the best way, but there are steps you need to take when using it with create-react-app?)
- styled components: library for react / react native. basically sub-components with names that correspond to actual HTML elements. also seems interesting, gets around classes? but could get messy?

### Component.css
- default approach with create-react-app - certain packages allow us to just `import` css stylesheet for each component
- once you run the build command, things get plopped into one central css file. But this way makes it easier for quick development and testing of different styles
- sass still an option, for sure
- using `BEM` - need to research this naming convention not tied to DOM structure
- come back to this for final project!

## Schedule project intro
visual design, static html and CSS will be provided. Cool, but also i feel like i need to learn more CSS. That being said, at this point i am definitely leaning more towards back-end as an actual job... but we'll see

four phases of the project:
1. build components in isolation
2. retrieve data from API and render using components
3. Manage visue state
4. Implement advanced react patterns

- "If you want to manually test your components in isolation" using `Storybook` environment - looks neat
- "If you want to run your entire application in development mode" `webpack-dev-server` for live reload
- "If you want to run unit or integration tests from the command line" `Jest` for testing, live testing too in "watch" mode
- "If you wan to run automated end-to-end tests in the browser" then `Cypress` for end-to-end automated testing 

** **note here about installing `eslint-parser` but only when switching sass dependencies - not sure if needed, skipping for now, since node-sass was already removed. i think this got fixed - and running all the commands workd fine

## JavaScript Compilation and Module Bundling
- `Babel` is a javascript compiler that converts what we write into a "backwards compatible" version. that's neat
- `Webpack` is the module bundler, deals with our dependencies - basically creates a bundle.js file that handles it all. so anything ypu use from node_modules gets collected here.

main takeaways of the benefit of using something like create-react-app:
1. Embed environment variables into the code at build time
2. Remove code that does not ever get run
3. Use features of JavaScript that aren't standard