# WEEK 5 START

## Project notes

- for **`git commits`**: write in present tense - "add" over "added"

## dev tools recap
- finally skimmed over the dev tools assignment from end of week 3, all good tools, but as expected, was more relevant to tweeter week. bookmarked and moving on

## PSQL - Postgres
- i think we are using examples where ROLES are called `vagrant` and `labber` - so i'm going to make these as is explained:
  - ROLE `vagrant` PASSWORD `123`
  - ROLE `labber` PASSWORD `labber`

- in console, use `psql` to access server, use `\q` to quit psql.
- if you restart, use `brew services start postgresql` to actually start the server

Using multiple lines is totally fine and doable but need to be VERY STRICT with syntax. do not forget semicolons for ending your statement. same with single vs double quotes.

pay attention to the prompt: it will have either `=`, `-`, `(` or possibly other symbols depending on where you are in writing a command

- when adding values to a table, you don't need to specify primary key ?
- can do `COUNT(*)` to count all?

## BootcampX
- setup project, create database, add tables, add data to tables

Entities:
  - students
  - cohorts
  - assignments
  - assignment_submissions
  - teachers
  - assistance_requests

Cohort will have:
  - id
  - name
  - start_date
  - end_date

Student will have:
  - id
  - name
  - email
  - phone
  - github
  - start_date
  - end_date
  -cohort_id

## doing the work
- so I ended up setting up the tables in command line, but it looks like we can do it from the file instead?
- discovered `DROP TABLE` which is pretty straightforward to delete tables
- setting up foreign key involves `REFERENCES` command

## getting ready for lots of queries
- we will get list of requirements to write queries for.
- Each query will be given its own `.sql` file
- before starting a new exercise, create a new directory for those upcoming queries?
- this is so that we can have the convenience of working in VSCODE instead of having to do everything from top to bottom in psql session. OK, that makes sense then
- then we can just use `\i filename.sql`, i for _include_
- feel free to try out queries before checking answer. wcgw
- follow this outline for all quesies we work on for now

## query notes / tips
- when looking at a column for any rows missing value - I thought it might be WHERE github = '', but it's actually `WHERE github IS NULL` - which makes sense. Also can do `IS NOT NULL`
- if you make a huge query, just hit `q` to skip to the end/ get back to command line
- `ON DELETE CASCADE` option is to specify whether you want rows deleted in a child table when corresponding rows are deleted in the parent table. 

## JOIN
- syntax is after FROM. if you have tables with same names for columns, use dot notation to specify. also need ON to link the keys - So, altogether we have something like `FROM` students `JOIN` cohorts `ON` cohort_id = cohorts.id`.
- and in SELECT we can use `AS` to _alias_ the columns, so they display with more readable names
- keep track of left and right in terms of what's on each side of JOIN, and each side of =
- there are different JOIN types which we can specify:

  - `INNER JOIN` - displays only rows that contain selected values (at least one val from each table?). default join?
    - from compass, confirmed: "An INNER JOIN will only give us rows where there is a match between the two tables. if the foreign key is NULL, the row will not be included in the result of an INNER JOIN."

  - `OUTER JOIN` - need to specify `LEFT`, `RIGHT` or `FULL` with this, otherwise will get error. Actually, for  LEFT and RIGHT, we don't need to type OUTER, it's the same thing. LEFT/RIGHT specifies which table should have all of its rows returned. DO still need OUTER when using FULL.

    - "An OUTER JOIN will join the tables similarly to an INNER JOIN but will return all results for one of the tables, even when the join condition is not met. For any row where the condition was not met, a row is added with NULL data."

To recap:
- "An INNER JOIN will only return results where there is a match between the two tables. An OUTER JOIN will do the same as an INNER JOIN but also returns unmatched rows in one or both tables. An OUTER JOIN can be LEFT, RIGHT, or FULL."

## BootcampX JOINs
- curious about best practice syntax, I'm getting correct results but not same syntax given in answer on compass.

## GROUP BY / HAVING
- see this example and think of it as: `GROUP BY` is telling `COUNT(assignment_submissions.*)` to run for every student:
``` sql
SELECT students.name AS student, COUNT(assignment_submissions.*) AS total_submissions
FROM assignment_submissions
JOIN students ON students.id = student_id
GROUP BY students.name;
```
^ there's an example here of what i was talking about before. we don't NEED to specify students.name, we can just use name, because there's no name column in the submissions. also the join on equation can be reversed, but maybe this does make more sense

then, `HAVING` acts like `WHERE` but with aggregate functions. you can't use WHERE with an aggregate, and you can't use an alias when calling the aggregate

- I'm noticing another parallel, SQL requests have a structure / action that seems similar to the whole bubbling concept - you build it from the inside out, and it evaluates in a top-down-back-out kind of way... kindof

- you CAN use aliases for GROUP BY and ORDER BY

- (heading into lecture, one left to do on queries 3. then a bit more from monday then we can get on to tuesday. better day today hopefully)

- ok now, wake up, slow down. dont get done in by spelling mistakes now

## sub-queries

### subquery in SELECT
- sometimes it can be preferable to do a subquery rather than JOIN an extra table involved.
- this can be done right at the top, within the main select command - you can do whole operations there
- per compass, which makes sense: "If a query returns a single value, we can use it in our SELECT statement just like any other value."

Example:
``` sql
SELECT (
  SELECT count(*)
  FROM table_name
) as total, other_column
FROM other_table_name
ORDER BY total;
```

### subquery in FROM
Now, a different example where the subquery is done within the FROM part - think about how the subquery returns a table in its own way: 
``` sql
SELECT * FROM (
  SELECT something_id
  FROM someTable
  WHERE something
) as sub_table;
```

this can become handy in cases where we would want nexted aggregate calls (which don't work)

actual example here: 

``` sql
SELECT avg(total_students) as average_students
FROM (
  SELECT count(students) as total_students
  FROM students
  JOIN cohorts on cohorts.id = cohort_id
  GROUP BY cohorts
) as totals_table;
```
i think one main takeaway is a NEED to use aliasing here.as well as the need to be able to craft a query like this in an editor rather than line by line in the CLI.

### subquery in WHERE

- this is the most common subquery format, using IN

``` sql
SELECT assignments.name
FROM assignments
WHERE id NOT IN
(
  SELECT assignment_id
  FROM assignment_submissions
  JOIN students ON students.id = student_id
  WHERE students.name = 'Ibrahim Schimmel'
);
```
- remember to think of it this way. a subquery basically returns a subtable - the subquery can have as many parts as it needs
- using `IN` seems like... reverse grammar? like you say WHERE x IN () , and you're searching for () within x.
- i think you do need a "simple value" single column in a nested select - or maybe that's just if you're looknig for a numeric value

## exercises with nested select

- using ROUND on a while ass operation
- sqlZoo was honestly kindof annoying but i might need to go back for it... i dunno