## Finally onto today's work
- i can now understand why they said go on to today and finish yeseterday later - but with midterms coming up it seems like it's all got to be done one way or another. so here we are

- adding more entities: teachers, assistance requests
- created two more tables: new syntax `BOOLEAN DEFAULT TRUE`, using `TIMESTAMP`

## 4_ more queries
- possibly it is best practice to always use full identifiers with dot notation? definitely gets around any confusion later on? no idea, i'm seeing it both ways in compass. 

- #9, for AVERAGE TOTAL DURATION: this one was tricky. notice how the `AVG()` is referencing the **ALIAS** of the sum column in the nested selection. THIS MAKES SENSE. I still don't know if the other column is needed, but don't feel like playing around with it too much right now.

- don't need to set `AS id` for something you're getting with dot notation
- still getting the hang of where to use `*` or not
- #12, use commas when you need to group by multiple - OR: use `SELECT DISTINCT`

## What is Database Design?

- first though, a big takeaway from lecture was: ERDs are a 'slice' of your database. it's describing ONE instance of ANY GIVEN entity, without actually USING any of the data

- as much as possible we want to design databases correctly the first time. it's not so easy to adjust them after the fact
- articles on wikipedia - read the main one, bookmarked the links - it's a deep CS topic

## DB normalization
- concept of `normal forms` - kindof what Francis talked about, getting pregressively more organized
- we follow normal forms to enforce data integrity, reduce duplication, make it easier to manage data.

## relationships between tables
- `the foreign key is on the many side.`
- many-to-many- require a JOIN table (I liked bridge table, but ok)

## Lighthouse BnB ERD planning:
Just copying an outline here to get started from. remember all tables need ID FIRST

- user - can own many properties, can make many reservations
  - name
  - email
  - password

.
- property - belongs to one owner, can have many reviews
  - title
  - description
  - cost per night
  - parking_spaces
  - number of bathrooms
  - number of bedrooms
  - __images__:
    - thumbnail photo
    - cover photo
  - __address data__:
    - country
    - street
    - city
    - province
    - postal code
  - active / inactive
  - owner (REGISTERED USER from user table)

.
- reservation (links guest user with property) belongs to one guest
  - start date
  - end date
  - guest id
  - property id

. 
- property review
  - message
  - rating
  - guest id
  - reservation id

  ## revealing the compass answer 
  - so i'm not crazy, they know they have the property review denormailzied by having the property ID in there: prop review has reservation id, reservation has property - so you should just do the multiple joins to get what is needed.
  - but there is a reason, it's likely we'll want to access reviews for properties directly faily often. so just need to be careful our data stays accurate

  ## quick psql note
  - `\d` shows everything
  - `\dt` shows only tables

  - when you start to run into errors saying something has to be in a GROUP BY - you may be able to get around it by setting a GROUP BY on the id for that table

  ## node postgres (pg)

  - now we get into the stuff pedro was talking about: `node-postgres` library so we can connect to database from js app
  - seems like it cound be importand for me `To use node >= 14.x you will need to install pg@8.2.x or later due to some internal stream changes on the node 14 branch.`

  - some examples/ standards use `pool`, some use `client` for connecting to pg

  ## using SQL queries in a JS file is an amazing thing
  - "we get to use the power of SQL queries, and get the results back in the convenience of JS objects.

  ## sql injection
  - holy lord please sanitize your inputs

  - we as developers need to section out what we have control over and what we don't. assume the worst in users - don't leave any holes.
  - we set up placeholders with `$#`s and pass values through elsewhere. the $ makes it get converted to a string, cannot escape with a single quote.