# Week 5 Wendesday
starting with

## Data Definition Language (DDL)
- SQL commands that we use to DEFINE the database `schema` are known as DDL statements, commonly `CREATE`, `ALTER` and `DROP`.
- always need to specify data types when creating table. for now we need to be specific with postgres data types
- `ALTER TABLE`
  - whole link to info on it [here](https://www.postgresqltutorial.com/postgresql-tutorial/postgresql-alter-table/)
  - if doing `ADD COLUMN`, do need to write ADD COLUMN for each column you want to add.
- seems like you can set any column to `NOT NULL`, if you do will get error of null value is submitted.
  - seems like a really good error condition to look out for when a form is submitted.
- can `SET DEFAULT` to have a default value set (if nothing given?), either in ALTER or at table creation
- `SERIAL` is a `pseudo-type` unique to postgres, it's just an integer set to auto-increment. this is actually a set on default!
- `\d <table name>` is an awesome command to show some details.
- when doing `INSERT INTO ... VALUES` you can simply put in multiple values like `(), (), ...();`
- making sure foreign keys use `REFERENCES` is pretty important, and will keep from faulty keys being added (wrong references to existing keys CAN still happen though, esp from human error)
- when using delete, it's not the same as select - you don't go DELETE * FROM..., but you do `DELETE FROM ... WHERE ...`
- postgres creates "sequenece" for each serial?
- setting `ON DELETE CASCADE` is a `CONSTRAINT` on a foreign key. setting this will make it so that if something gets deleted "upstream", this value will be removed as well.
  - i wonder how this works when there are multiple FKs?

  ## "quick reference" from Compass

Quick Reference

- Primary key column:
  - Use the name id and then SERIAL PRIMARY KEY.
- Foreign key columns:
  - Add _id to the singular name of the column you are referencing.
  - If the primary key is SERIAL, then the foreign key should be INTEGER.
  - You also should create the foreign key with REFERENCES table_name(id) ON DELETE CASCADE.
- Names, emails, usernames and passwords can all be stored as VARCHAR(255). Students to cohorts would be cohort_id. The type would be INTEGER .
- Dates would use the DATE type. If we needed date and time, use TIMESTAMP.
- Numbers:
  - We will use INTEGER to represent most numbers. There are other sizes of integers as well.
  - SMALLINT -32,768 to 32,767 (thirty-two thousand)
  - INTEGER -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647 (two billion)
  - BIGINT -9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807 (nine quintillion)
  - SERIAL 1 to 2,147,483,647 (auto incrementing)
- Dates, Phone Numbers & Currency
  - Become familiar with the ISO 8601 date formatting standard. The string '2018-02-12' uses this format to represent 'February 12th, 2018'. Year, month and then day. Dates should be stored consistently. Apply timezones and formatting when displayed to the user.
  - Store phone numbers as VARCHAR, there are so many possible formats. The number 214 748 3647 hits our INTEGER limit.
  - Store currency as an integer representing cents. Use a BIGINT if you need values over $21 million dollars.

## Data Manipulation Language (DML)
- these are the commands we use to actually interact with data: `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE`, `DELETE`
- for INSERT INTO, if only adding data for certain columns, need to specify columns. Otherwise if adding for all columns, don't need to specify
  - you can do a SELECT statement within an INSERT if you want to pull data from another table.
- for DELETE, **NEED TO SPECIFY `WHERE`** otherwise you could delete the whole table
  - careful when deleting from a table using self-incrementing serial. it doesn't reset / go back to fill empty number. again looking back at delete cascades, want to make sure you don't end up pointing to old data with previously used id, so maybe that's a good thing
  - usually you may want to just set a "deleted_at" column, instead of ACTUALLY deleting. at least with production databases. testing, deleting is normal
- for UPDATE, syntax is `UPDATE table SET column = new value WHERE id = #`
- if you don't use where, it will update ALL values in that column.
- BE VERY F**KING CAREFUL USING UPDATE AND DELETE

## LightBnB WEB APP
- so... we don't sue `;` when writing in a js function? i'd like to double check that. also - i dunno, this example seems to have some contrived points where things are hard coded.
  - REMEMBER PROMISES: `.then returns a promise, which is returned as a result of the entire getAllProperties function.`
  - ALSO: `Why do we have to return a promise from getAllProperties? Couldn't we refactor to return result.rows an array of objects? It has to do with where getAllProperties is being used elsewhere in the project. When getAllProperties is called in the apiRoutes.js file, it is chained to .then, which can only consume a promise.`